[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So with the chakra toning,
the various tones affect
the different chakras.
So you can also work with
the colors of the chakras
and the organs associated with
those chakras, for instance,
and the emotional
attachments as well.
So for the base chakra,
which is below the spine,
there is associations with
survival and foundations
and family, and also with
the areas of the body
within that chakra.
So there's the base
chakra affects things
like the sexual organs, as
well as the sacral chakra,
but the sacral
chakra also reflects
things like creativity,
and the kidneys,
and the organs within that area.
So you can go as deep as you
want to with this technique
and understanding the chakras
and the colors involved, or you
can just simply do the
tones, and they will
affect those areas in any case.
We found with this technique
that it's very simple,
and you can actually start
at a deep tone and go higher,
or you'll just naturally
fall into that.
I have a deeper
tone, so the tones
that I use for the
chakras will vary.
And sometimes, I'll find I'll
be able to get a high tone where
I wasn't to begin with.
So it varies from day to day,
it varies the time of day,
it varies with the
emotional stuff
that you're going through, as
well as how you're feeling.
So it could be that you're a
little bit tired, so you'll
find the day before is
completely different to how
you are the next day.
So we find when you're
doing this technique,
you build more and
more and more on it.
So it's a good technique
to do any time of the day.
Can do it weekly.
There's no hard and
fast rules with this.
There's no right or
wrong, because it's
all up to the individual,
and it is actually
a very unique experience
for each person.
So we find I actually--
because I don't come from
a singing background,
so sometimes my voice
will go [VOCALIZING]
which I found a lot of people
do, and so it's quite normal.
I'm not an opera singer,
and not a lot of people are,
so it makes it just relax about
it and enjoy the experience
and have fun with it.
And I find sometimes that
I'm really concentrating,
so I can feel my face
tense up, so just
be aware of what
you're doing as well,
and if you feel
yourself tense up,
just try and relax a
little bit with it.
You can relax your face muscles.
So as you're going through,
if you find you are tensed up
or you're frowning,
you're concentrating,
just relax and just
relax your face muscles.
And is there anything
you'd like to say?
>> Yes, on that
note, you can grin.
Grinning is very good for you.
And you could notice
when you grin,
you notice those muscles
in the back of your head,
and I found that very, very
helpful in chakra toning.
I'll be concentrating on a note,
but occasionally, the voice
is wavering or whatever,
and if you grin,
it can help actually relax
down whatever that tension is
and the note comes back.
Not always, but I thoroughly
agree with Michelle.
The main thing in any yoga-- and
this is, after all, Nada yoga,
the yoga of sound--
that yoga means simply
union, basically.
And so the whole point
here is to join in and be
as unselfconscious as possible.
And we've found that the
simplicity of the chakra
toning, you're just
coming out with any sound.
You're not being
judged by it, but you
do need to participate
so that you
can hear your own vibration,
first and foremost.
Then, as in with, say, the
Pranayama that we often
do at the beginning
of each session,
you start to concentrate on one
spot, and that, we've learned,
is very, very helpful,
both for the mind,
but also for the
organs of the body.
So concentrating by not worrying
about the sounds your making,
you then start to notice the
sound, the texture of it,
the timber of it and so
forth, and after a while,
I would suggest if
you do this practice,
start looking at
the actual vowel
sounds that you're producing.
There's a tendency, say, with
ah not so much, but with A,
to actually end up going
ah-ee and hang onto the E.
And the idea is to
remain at the beginning,
and you start to notice the
structure in your throat, where
you're holding your
tongue, [VOCALISING]
and the moment it becomes an
E, you drop the jaw a fraction.
And all of this is
a tremendous tonic,
because the longer you can hold
a good-sounding vowel sound,
the better it is for your body,
and after a while, the better
it is for your vocal chords.
And you'll find that people
who can't sing on pitch,
can't get the note at all, will.
And we've had groups
of people where
after awhile, if
you're in a group,
you may notice that
you're all starting
to sing a related
note or the note
itself in a more harmonious way,
and it gets better like that.
But again, I'd reiterate
what Michele was saying.
Don't worry about what
the sound is at all.
The only important thing is
to join in and try it out.
>> And I found with
this technique,
because I'm asthmatic, and
I've also got an underactive
thyroid, with the toning, I
have found my lung capacity has
gotten better, I'm able to
project my voice a lot more.
I have more confidence.
And it's actually very
clearing, and very energizing,
and very relaxing.
So that all helps the body and
general well-being as the cells
respond to the tone and the
sound of your own voice.
And it's quite a
powerful technique
because the cells will
interact together and spark off
each other, so you'll find
your circulation will improve,
your breath will
improve, your confidence,
your clarity will
improve as well.
Things like people who
don't normally sing then
go to places where they
will stand up and sing
because they've gotten used
to using their own voice.
And it's a powerful tool
because our soul and our spirits
respond.
>> And a final note,
possibly, when you're driving,
you can do this technique.
And I found when
I'm on long drives,
and you know how you start to
feel a bit heavy in the head
and tired, and I also have
a slight sinus reaction
to air conditioning when
it's the middle of summer,
the two notes of A in
the third eye, and also E
for the Sahasrara, or the
crown chakra, when you actually
come out with those
quite strongly
in the confines of a cab,
that can clear your sinuses
and it wakes you up.
It actually helps balance
both hemispheres of the mind.
And it's one of the
nicest ways to stay awake
that I know for
long drive, so I'll
throw that in for good measure.
>> And there's a few things
just to talk about as well,
because we start with
the oms at the beginning,
and then with the chakra toning,
we start from the base up
to the crown, and then go back
down from the crown back down
to the base chakra.
You can vary it
as you would like.
You can just do from
the base to the crown.
We do both because we
find that going back down
is also grounding.
But just experiment with this,
because as I said before,
there's no hard and fast
rules, and it's very freeing.
So just give anything a try.
If you want to try
the sound of ah,
just straight, just do that
and just keep repeating it
and resonate with the heart,
so focus your attention
with the heart.
And any sound you can
use on any chakra,
but they do resonate
with particular ones.
So you can say A, and
that's the third eye.
So you may find as
you're going up and down
that when you go through
to particular chakras,
you'll feel more energized or
more clarity within that area.
I found today as we were doing
the technique, on the way
back down, my solar
plexus suddenly cleared
and I had more clarity, and
I got the note right on.
And you can really
feel when you do that.
It just sounds
crystal clear, and you
know that you're in
harmony with that note.
And I found that when
that happened for me,
I felt almost bliss.
So you become very
attuned to yourself
as well as you're going
through this technique.
And as I said before,
just have fun with it
and enjoy and experiment.
>> Yes, indeed.
Please enjoy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]